---
title: How do I develop accessible websites?
description: If you need to know how to get started then this will help you out.
layout: $layouts/AlkuEnglish.astro
---

# How do I develop accessible websites?

Accessibility is a topic that is constantly becoming more and more important on the web landscape. It has been important
since the beginning, but due to society changing a bit slowly &ndash; especially on anything that relates to minorities
and divergent people &ndash; it has taken a while that legislation, recommendations, and just pure basic knowledge has
grown enough to reach a critical mass of people.

I'm not going to do deep on why accessibility is important. Personally, to me it is just plain good usability. It has
been proven time and again that once you "get" how to do accessible sites you actually improve the experience for
**everyone**. For comparison this same idea also applies to the real world and maybe we sometime will also get nicer,
less noisy, and less bright cities. Simply by accounting the needs of diverse people better.

Anyway, I throw in some of my experience regarding the topic.

## The screen reader

You should spend time to learn how to use a screen reader. On desktop. On mobile.

The most basic thing is that given that you can't see visually anything, the information announced should be sufficient
to understand what is happening. **How** this information is provided is a bit irrelevant, there are many ways to solve
a problem. This might sometimes give you a feeling that you end up getting conflicting information regarding screen
reader accessibility on the web, especially when comparing technical solutions.

Ignore the conflict. Instead learn the difference of **why** some specific technical solution is suggested in one place,
and why it is different elsewhere. And in the end what matters is that enough and sufficient information is available
that the experience is understandable.

And to understand better you should learn about the various features provided by each screen reader. There are many ways
to navigate your way around!

## Don't confuse links and buttons

This is a very basic thing about the web, but only use links for navigating around, and let buttons be for interactions.

Example: even if it is technically possible, do not implement an accordion using `:target`. Why? Because it relies on
links, and links are for navigating. But when you click such an accordion open there will be no indication of a state
change: a screen reader won't know to tell that hey, you just opened something, a state changed and new content is now
accessible!

Instead use a button as is recommended, and make sure that the button announces the state change (eg. open / closed).

Understanding the difference of links and buttons is important, even if you may in some cases create links that look
like buttons. An unfortunately popular design pattern.

## Screen readers are used by people who can see

You tell me what?!? Why would anyone torture themselves with a screen reader if they can see?!

Not all blindness is total blindness. Some people have very poor eyesight. Some others may have only partial sight in
their eye and see only a narrow strip at once.

This means that not all screen reader users use a keyboard. They use a mouse just fine. Instead they may use an onscreen
magnifier to help out.

## Keyboard is important

Supporting doing everything via keyboard makes sense. For example, it is quite too often that people develop "very
advanced and cool" drag and drop interfaces which require high precision. And that will ultimately make those tools
exclusive to those that are able to use them. This is why you should consider also supporting keyboard, and better yet,
allow getting the stuff done with just basic mouse use. Even if it is slower than dragging and dropping stuff around.

As an important reminder not everything has to be done in 1-to-1 fashion! Say, if you have an input that has + and -
buttons to increase a value, you do not need to make those buttons accessible to a keyboard if you provide another
mechanism already, for example, up and down arrows. It might actually be better to not give access to those individual
buttons because it would be just more noise to the user!

## Accessibility is boring

Accessibility is very interesting and challenging, but it doesn't really build up hype anywhere. It isn't like a fresh
new JS framework or CSS utility tool that get people all pumped up and form a cult around it. Why is that?

A part of it is that we are dealing a very broad topic. By it's very nature accessibility concerns vary wildly and you
can't really carve out a solution that works "like a silver bullet". It is just plain hard work and continuous struggle
to do better.

Additionally the people that accessibility concerns the most are minorities. People who often have trauma and are
excluded out from participating. This means that people have **used to being treated poorly**: they are used to sites
that just keep reading irrelevant stuff over and over while being totally silent about that most important thing that
needs to get done. Sites like these are humiliating to use if you can't make up what is happening, and are forced to ask
for help.

The worst thing is that this can happen even on a site that has been done with accessibility concerns on mind just
because some thing wasn't considered in an accessible fashion right from the beginning, technical solutions were made,
and now nobody is willing to give development time to fix it "because it's already done" and changing the technical
solution would be a very, very big hit to team velocity. It happens.

This is why it is not that great of an idea to even go ahead an attempt to make it cool by having some form of populist
take on accessibility. The people you are targeting will likely feel alienated by that. So accessibility is important,
but boring. I recommend you to learn to tolerate boring in your life especially if you like to maximize your time usage
and "never have a bad time".

## Summary

Make sites that are understandable regardless the way they are used. Study all sorts of diversity and "disability".
Remember that disability is often caused by the surroundings. Popular conventions may be wrong. Unique and fancy
solutions need special attention to accessibility to ensure they work for everyone. Keep your ego down: if you think you
have a great solution and want to push it out, you might end up doing more harm than good in case what you have done is
not accessible.
